<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN"
    "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd">
<!-- $Id$ -->

<chapter id="ch.concepts">
  <title>Bakefile Concepts</title>

  <section id="concept.target">
    <title>Targets</title>
    <para>
      Like in traditional makefiles. Target is a single buildable entity,
      e.g. executable, library or DLL. See <xref linkend="ch.targets"/>
      for details.
    </para>
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.variables">
    <title>Variables</title>
    <para>
      You can set and use variables in Bakefile in a way very similar to other
      make programs. Variables may be either global or local to the target
      they are bound to.
      Note that variables are expanded by Bakefile and do 
      <emphasis>not</emphasis> appear as variables in generated native
      makefiles (compare with <link linkend="concept.option">options</link>).
    </para>
    <para>
      Variables are expanded by typing <command>$(var)</command> (for some
      variable <varname>var</varname>) in makefile text. Same syntax is used
      to expand <link linkend="concept.option">options</link> and
      <link linkend="concept.condvar">conditional variables</link>, too.
    </para>
  </section>

  <section id="concept.template">
    <title>Templates</title>
    <para>
      It is often the case that several targets in the makefile share the same
      properties: for example, they are installed into same directory, use
      same compiler settings or include headers from same directories.
      Templates are a mechanism designed to eliminate such duplication from
      makefiles. In Bakefile, you simply declare that a target
      <emphasis>derives</emphasis> from template (or templates) and it will
      inherit all its properties. See description of <link
        linkend="cmd.template">template command</link>.
    </para>
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.option">
    <title>Options</title>
    <para>
      It is desirable that generated makefiles are configurable to some
      degree (especially with the <literal>autoconf</literal> backend). Bakefile
      makes it possible to declare so-called <emphasis>options</emphasis>
      using <xref linkend="cmd.option"/> command. Each format backend has its
      own way of presenting options and some formats may fail to support them
      at all. Some formats (such as Visual C++ project files backend) have
      only limited support of options. Typically, options are translated into
      variables in native makefiles and can be modified by the user.
    </para>
    <para>
      This is how setting an option may look with <literal>autoconf</literal>:
    </para>
    <para>
      <prompt>$ </prompt><userinput>./configure --enable-debug</userinput>
    </para>
    <para>
      Or with VC++ makefiles:
    </para>
    <para>
      <prompt>C:\> </prompt><userinput>nmake DEBUG=1</userinput>
    </para>
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.conditions">
    <title>Conditions</title>        
    <para>
      Condition is a boolean expression that is used to conditionally
      determine values of variables and also to conditionally disable or
      enable parts of the makefile. Conditions are commonly used to differ
      generated native makefiles based on output format and user settings of
      <link linkend="concept.option">options</link>.
    </para>
    <para>
      There are two types of conditions:
      <variablelist id="concept.conditions.types">

        <varlistentry id="concept.conditions.weak">
          <term>Weak</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>
              The condition may be any Python expression that only uses
              variables defined with the <xref linkend="cmd.set"/> command
              and Python helper functions from available modules. The
              expression must evaluate to either 0 (false) or 1 (true).
            </para>
            <para>
              If it evaluates to 0, then the statement that has the condition
              associated with it is not processed. If it evalues to 1, that
              the statement is processed as if it had no condition.
            </para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry id="concept.conditions.strong">
          <term>Strong</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>
              These conditions depend on the value of an
              <link linkend="concept.option">option</link>. Their syntax is
              very limited compared to weak conditions, because the
              decisition (condition evaluation) is postponed until make-time 
              -- i.e. generated native makefile contains the condition
              in some form.
            </para>
            <para>
              The condition may only take the form of simple test for
              equality:
              <programlisting>OPTION=="VALUE"</programlisting>
              Here, <varname>OPTION</varname> is the name of an already defined
              <link linkend="concept.option">option</link>
              <emphasis>with enumerated possible values</emphasis> and
              <varname>VALUE</varname> is one of the option's values.
            </para>
            <para>
              If a strong conditions is used with the
              <xref linkend="cmd.set"/> command, a
              <link linkend="concept.condvar">conditional variable</link> is
              created.
            </para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

      </variablelist>

      Examples of valid conditions:
      <programlisting><![CDATA[
<set var="NUM1">1</set>
<set var="NUM2">10</set>
<set var="RESULT_11" cond="NUM1+NUM2==11">yes</set>
        
<option name="BUILD">
  <values>debug,release</values>
  <default-value>release</default-value>
</option>

<set var="USE_DEBUG" cond="BUILD=='debug'">1</set>
<set var="USE_DEBUG" cond="BUILD=='release'">0</set>
]]></programlisting>

      Examples of invalid conditions:
      <programlisting><![CDATA[
<option name="NUM1">
  <default-value>1</default-value>
</option>
</set>
<set var="NUM2">10</set>
<set var="RESULT_11" cond="NUM1+NUM2==1">yes</set>
        
<option name="BUILD">
  <values>R D</values>
</option>

<set var="USE_DEBUG" cond="BUILD=='debug'">1</set>
     <!-- not in the list of values -->

<option name="BUILD2"></option>

<set var="USE_DEBUG2" cond="BUILD2=='debug'">1</set>
     <!-- not option with enumeration -->

<option name="BUILD3">
  <values>release debug</values>
</option>

<set var="USE_DEBUG3" cond="BUILD!='debug'">1</set>
     <!-- not equality test -->
]]></programlisting>
      
    </para> 
    <para>
      See also:
      <xref linkend="concept.condvar"/>,
      <xref linkend="cmd.set"/>
    </para>    
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.condvar">
    <title>Conditional Variables</title>
    <para>
      Conditional variables are variables whose value differs depending on
      a condition. They are created by using the conditional form of
      <xref linkend="cmd.set"/> command. Unlike options, they can't be
      directly modified by user of native makefile. Unlike variables, they
      are not evaluated by Bakefile during processing (the value depends on
      values of options).
    </para>
    <para>
      Summary of differences between options, variables and conditional
      variables:
      <informaltable>
        <tgroup cols='3'>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Type</entry>
              <entry>Value</entry>
              <entry>Set by user</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>variable</entry>
              <entry>constant</entry>
              <entry>no</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>option</entry>
              <entry>variable</entry>
              <entry>yes</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>conditional variable</entry>
              <entry>variable (derived from some option)</entry>
              <entry>no</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </informaltable>
    </para>
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.modules">
    <title>Modules</title>
    <para>
      <emphasis>Modules</emphasis> extend Bakefile with additional abilities.
      For example, standard configuration of Bakefile can't build Python
      modules. You must explicitly load <literal>python</literal> module which
      will add, among other things, <function>python-module</function> rule.
      Functionality is divided into modules so that generated makefiles are
      not cluttered with unused options and to avoid unnecessary
      <emphasis>configure</emphasis> checks.
    </para>
  </section>
  
  <section id="concept.preset">
    <title>Presets</title>
    <para>
      Presets are pieces of Bakefile code that can be included in user
      bakefiles. Their purpose is to provide support for e.g. libraries or
      tools or to provide commonly used code snippets in convenient form.
    </para>
    <para>
      For example, Bakefile contains the <literal>simple</literal> preset
      that can be used to quickly create makefiles with support for both
      debug and release builds.
    </para>
  </section>

  <section id="concept.paths">
    <title>Paths</title>
    <para>
      Regardless of the operating system where Bakefile is running, the convention
      respected by all Bakefile tags and variables is to use Unix-style paths, i.e. to
      use forward slash (<literal>/</literal>) as the path separator.
    </para>
  </section>

</chapter>
