<chapter id="ch.formats">
  <title>Format specific documentation</title>
  <para>
    Depending on the format there are some additional steps required to
    get extra functionality specific to this format.
  </para>



  <section id="format.msvs2005prj">
    <title>MS VisualStudio 2005 extended functionality</title>
    <para>
      The <literal>msvs2005prj</literal> is capable of generating project
      files both for Win32 PC platform and for embedded platform. By default,
      only Win32 configurations are generated, embedded configurations must
      be explicitly enabled.
    </para>
    <para>
      This is done by setting the
      <link  linkend="var.MSVS_PLATFORMS"><varname>MSVS_PLATFORMS</varname></link>
      variable to comma-separated list of platforms to use. Accepted platform
      names are:
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem><para><literal>Win32</literal></para></listitem>
          <listitem><para><literal>Pocket PC 2003 (ARMV4)</literal></para></listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </para>
    <para>
      The variable must be set before user bakefile file is processed, i.e.
      it has to be done using command-line <literal>-D</literal> argument or
      in the <filename>Bakefiles.bkgen</filename> file.
    </para>
    <para>
      For example, the following command causes Bakefile to generate projects
      for Pocket PC 2003: 
    </para>
    <para>
      <prompt>$ </prompt>
      <userinput>
      bakefile -fmsvs2005prj -DMSVS_PLATFORMS="Pocket PC 2003 (ARMV4)" hello.bkl
      </userinput>
    </para>
    <para>
      And this generates hybrid project for both PocketPC and Win32 platforms:
    </para>
    <para>
      <prompt>$ </prompt>
      <userinput>
      bakefile -fmsvs2005prj -DMSVS_PLATFORMS="Win32,Pocket PC 2003 (ARMV4)" hello.bkl
      </userinput>
    </para>
  </section>



  <section id="format.watcom">

    <title>Watcom format extended functionality</title>
    <para>
      Open Watcom compiler has possibility of crossplatform building for
      many platforms. MS Windows binaries are the most common used output
      of this compiler but it has also possibility of building for DOS,
      OS/2 and other operating systems. Because of that by default watcom
      makefiles are outputed with settings for building windows binaries.
      This default setting can be changed by
      <link linkend="bakefile.command.variable">defining</link> additional
      <link linkend="platform">platform</link> variable.
      <programlisting><![CDATA[
# generate makefile.wat dedicated to windows development
bakefile file.bkl -f watcom

# generate makefile.wat dedicated to DOS development in extended 32-bit mode
bakefile file.bkl -f watcom -DPLATFORM_MSDOS=1

# generate makefile.wat dedicated to OS/2 development
bakefile file.bkl -f watcom -DPLATFORM_OS2=1
]]></programlisting>
      <note>
        <title>PLATFORM_MSDOS note</title>
        <para>
          Only 32-bit DOS mode with dedicated extender is supported. Generated
          makefile contains additional <varname>DOS32</varname> variable which
          points to desired extender. Expected values: <varname>X32VM</varname>,
          <varname>X32</varname>, <varname>PMODEW</varname>,
          <varname>CAUSEWAY</varname>, <varname>DOS32A</varname> and default
          <varname>DOS4GW</varname> .
        </para>
      </note>
    </para>

  </section>
  
  
  
  <section id="wininstall">
    <title>Install and uninstall support on Windows</title>
    <para>
      By default the <xref linkend="tag.install-to"/> and 
      <xref linkend="tag.install-headers-to"/> tags won't have any effect
      on Windows since the install and uninstall MAKE targets are not very
      common there (unlike in the Unix world).
    </para>
    <para>
      However you may find it useful to have (un)installation targets
      under Windows as well. In this case you can enable this feature
      by <link linkend="bakefile.command.variable">defining</link> the
      <varname>FORMAT_HAS_MAKE_INSTALL</varname> variable and setting it to <literal>1</literal>:
      <programlisting><![CDATA[
# enable install and uninstall support also under Windows: 
bakefile file.bkl -f msvc -DFORMAT_HAS_MAKE_INSTALL=1
]]></programlisting>
    </para>
    <para>
      When enabling the install/uninstall support for Windows, you should also
      set the desired <varname>PREFIX</varname> and <varname>EXEC_PREFIX</varname> 
      in your bakefile:
      <programlisting><![CDATA[
<set var="PREFIX">%MYPROJECTROOT%</set>
<set var="EXEC_PREFIX">%MYPROJECTROOT%</set>
]]></programlisting>
    </para>
  </section>
  
  
</chapter>
