<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN"
    "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd">
<!-- $Id$ -->

<chapter id="ch.functions">
  <title>Python functions</title>

    <section id="sec.intro">
        <title>Introduction</title>

        <para>
            In Bakefile, the expression inside <literal>$(...)</literal>
            doesn't have to be a variable name, it can be
            <emphasis>any</emphasis> Python expression. Expressions that
            cannot be evaluated at runtime and are translated into output
            format conditions are more limited, but as long as the expression
            is evaluated only at Bakefile execution time, it can be any valid
            Python expression.  In particular, any Python functions may be
            called.
        </para>

        <para>
            In order to make common tasks easier, Bakefile provides
            miscellaneous utility functions which can
            be used in your bakefiles. Unlike tags and
            rules provided through <link linkend="ch.modules">modules</link>,
            the functions documented in this section are available everywhere
            in Bakefile.
        </para>

        <para>
            Except where explicitely stated differently, all functions accept
            as arguments Python strings.
        </para>
    </section>

    <section id="sec.pyfn.howto">
        <title>How to use a Python function in a bakefile</title>
        <para>
            Python instructions and thus also Python calls to functions, can
            be used in bakefile wrapping them into the <literal>$( )</literal>
            symbols.  E.g. suppose you want to use the
            <xref linkend="pyfunc.fileList"/> function described below to
            set variable <literal>A</literal>; you should then write:

            <programlisting><![CDATA[
<set var="A">
    $(fileList('mypath/*.c'))
</set>
            ]]></programlisting>
        </para>
    </section>



    <section id="sec.py.fn">
        <title>Python functions</title>
        <para>
            The following Python functions are defined:
        </para>
        
        <section id="pyfunc.envvar" xreflabel="envvar">
            <title>envvar</title>
            <synopsis>envvar(<parameter>"name"</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
              Returns reference to environment variable
              <varname>name</varname>. This function should be used instead
              of <literal>$(DOLLAR)(name)</literal> idiom, because some output
              formats (namely, Watcom makefiles) use different syntax for
              referencing environment variables.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.isconst" xreflabel="isconst">
            <title>isconst</title>
            <synopsis>isconst(<parameter>expr</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
              Returns <literal>true</literal> if the
              <emphasis>expression</emphasis> (i.e. not variable name as in
              the case of <xref linkend="pyfunc.isdefined"/> etc.) given as
              argument is constant expression.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.isdefined" xreflabel="isdefined">
            <title>isdefined</title>
            <synopsis>isdefined(<parameter>name</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns <literal>true</literal> if the given string is the name
            of an option or a (conditional) variable previously defined in the bakefile.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.isoption" xreflabel="isoption">
            <title>isoption</title>
            <synopsis>isoption(<parameter>name</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns <literal>true</literal> if the given string is the name
            of an option previously defined in the bakefile.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.iscondvar" xreflabel="iscondvar">
            <title>iscondvar</title>
            <synopsis>iscondvar(<parameter>name</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns <literal>true</literal> if the given string is the name
            of a conditional variable previously defined in the bakefile.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.ifthenelse" xreflabel="ifthenelse">
            <title>ifthenelse</title>
            <synopsis>ifthenelse(<parameter>cond</parameter>, <parameter>iftrue</parameter>, <parameter>iffalse</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Allows to write if-then-else constructs inside bakefiles. The
            arguments are respectively the <emphasis>if condition</emphasis>
            (use Python syntax!), the Python expression to execute in case the
            condition results true and the Python expression to execute in
            case the condition results false.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.ref" xreflabel="ref">
            <title>ref</title>
            <synopsis>ref(<parameter>var</parameter>, <parameter>target=None</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Creates a reference to the given <parameter>var</parameter> variable
            which will be evaluated only in the final stage of bakefile
            processing.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.isDeadTarget" xreflabel="isDeadTarget">
            <title>isDeadTarget</title>
            <synopsis>isDeadTarget(<parameter>target</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns <emphasis>true</emphasis> if the given string is the name
            of a conditional target whose condition is never met.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.substituteFromDict" xreflabel="substituteFromDict">
            <title>substituteFromDict</title>
            <synopsis>substituteFromDict(<parameter>var</parameter>, <parameter>dict</parameter>, <parameter>desc=None</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns the <emphasis>value</emphasis> of the dictionary entry
            whose <emphasis>key</emphasis> matches the value of the variable
            or option named <parameter>var</parameter>.
            E.g.
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
<set var="A">
    $(substituteFromDict(OPTION,{'1':'value1','0':'value0'}))
</set>
                ]]></programlisting>

            sets <emphasis>A</emphasis> to <emphasis>value1</emphasis> if
            <emphasis>OPTION</emphasis> is <emphasis>1</emphasis> or to
            <emphasis>value2</emphasis> if <emphasis>OPTION</emphasis> is
            <emphasis>0</emphasis>.
            Note that Python requires curly brackets to define a dictionary.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.nativePaths" xreflabel="nativePaths">
            <title>nativePaths</title>
            <synopsis>nativePaths(<parameter>filenames</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns the given string with the <literal>/</literal> characters
            substituted by the content of the <xref linkend="var.DIRSEP"/>
            variable (see the Variables section).
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.addPrefixIfNotEmpty" xreflabel="addPrefixIfNotEmpty">
            <title>addPrefixIfNotEmpty</title>
            <synopsis>addPrefixIfNotEmpty(<parameter>prefix</parameter>, <parameter>value</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Returns the <parameter>value</parameter> string prefixed with
            <parameter>prefix</parameter>, unless <parameter>value</parameter> is
            empty.
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.addPrefixToList" xreflabel="addPrefixToList">
            <title>addPrefixToList</title>
            <synopsis>addPrefixToList(<parameter>prefix</parameter>, <parameter>value</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Adds <parameter>prefix</parameter> to every item in
            <parameter>value</parameter> interpreted as whitespace-separated
            list.
            E.g.
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
<set var="A">
    $(addPrefixToList('file','1.txt 2.txt 3.txt'))
</set>
                ]]></programlisting>
            sets the <emphasis>A</emphasis> variable to <literal>file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt</literal>
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.safeSplit" xreflabel="safeSplit">
            <title>safeSplit</title>
            <synopsis>safeSplit(<parameter>str</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
            Splits the given string like the built-in split() Python function
            but, unlike the Python <literal>split()</literal> function,
            recognizes that an expression like
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
"$(myPythonFuncCall(arg1, arg2)) item2"
            ]]></programlisting>
            must be split as
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
[ "$(myPythonFuncCall(arg1, arg2))", "item2" ]
            ]]></programlisting>
            and not as the built-in split() function would do
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
[ "$(myPythonFuncCall(arg1,", "arg2))", "item2" ]
            ]]></programlisting>
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.fileList" xreflabel="fileList">
            <title>fileList</title>
            <synopsis>fileList(<parameter>path</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
                Returns a string containing a space-separed list of all files
                found in the given <parameter>path</parameter>.
                <parameter>path</parameter> typically is a relative path
                (absolute paths should be avoided in well-designed bakefiles)
                with a mask used to match only wanted files.
            </para>
            <para>
                When the given path is relative, it must be relative to the
                <xref linkend="var.SRCDIR"/>
                global variable; remember that <xref linkend="var.SRCDIR"/>
                is in turn relative to
                the location of the generated makefile
                (see <xref linkend="var.OUTPUT_FILE"/>).
            </para>
            <para>
                Additionally this function can accept Python lists of strings,
                too.  The returned value is the list of all files found in all
                the paths of the list.

            E.g.
            <programlisting><![CDATA[
<sources>$(fileList('../src/*.cpp'))</sources>
<sources>$(fileList(['../src/*.cpp', '../src/*.c']))</sources>
                ]]></programlisting>
            </para>
        </section>

        <section id="pyfunc.removeDuplicates" xreflabel="removeDuplicates">
            <title>removeDuplicates</title>
            <synopsis>removeDuplicates(<parameter>list</parameter>)</synopsis>
            <para>
                Returns a copy of the given (space-separed) list with all 
                duplicate tokens removed.
            </para>
        </section>
        
    </section>
</chapter>
